Doc: Middleware (#999)
zio/zio-http: docs/website/docs/v1.x/dsl/middleware.md

# Middleware

> Middlewares are transformations that one can apply on any Http to produce a new one. 

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Middlewares are transformations that one can apply on any `Http` to produce a new one. 
```

They can modify requests and responses and also transform them into more concrete domain entities.

> Middleware is simply a function that takes one `Http` as a parameter and returns another `Http` `f(Http) => Http` elaborated below in terms of type parameters "In" and "Out"

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Middleware is simply a function that takes one `Http` as a parameter and returns another `Http`, i.e, `f(Http) => Http` elaborated below in terms of type parameters "In" and "Out"
```

```scala
type Middleware[R, E, AIn, BIn, AOut, BOut] = Http[R, E, AIn, BIn] => Http[R, E, AOut, BOut]
```

* `AIn` and `BIn` are type params of the input `Http`
* `AOut` and `BOut` are type params of the output `Http`

## Create Middleware

### Middleware that does nothing

> returns the same `Http` as input without doing any modification

Reviewer: ```suggestion
returns the input `Http` as the output without doing any modification
```

```scala
val middleware: Middleware[Any, Nothing, Nothing, Any, Any, Nothing] = Middleware.identity
```

### Middleware that always succeeds

> creates a middleware that always returns the output `Http` that succeeds with the given value and never fails.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
creates a middleware that always returns an output `Http` that succeeds with the given value and never fails.
```

```scala
val middleware: Middleware[Any, Nothing, Nothing, Any, Any, Int] = Middleware.succeed(1)
```

### Middleware that always fails

> creates a middleware that always returns the output `Http` that always fails.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
creates a middleware that always returns an output `Http` that always fails.
```

```scala
val middleware: Middleware[Any, String, Nothing, Any, Any, Nothing] = Middleware.fail("error")
```

### Middleware from a partial function

> - `collect` creates middleware using a specified function

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- `collect` creates middleware using a specified function, `f: PartialFunction[AOut, Middleware[R, E, AIn, BIn, AOut, BOut]]`
```

```scala
val middleware: Middleware[Any, Nothing, Request, Response, Request, Response] = Middleware.collect[Request](_ => Middleware.addHeaders(Headers("a", "b")))
```

> - `collectZIO` creates middleware using a specified effect function

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- `collectZIO` creates middleware using a specified effect function, `f: PartialFunction[AOut, ZIO[R, E, Middleware[R, E, AIn, BIn, AOut, BOut]]]`
```

```scala
val middleware: Middleware[Any, Nothing, Request, Response, Request, Response] = Middleware.collectZIO[Request](_ => ZIO.succeed(Middleware.addHeaders(Headers("a", "b"))))
```

### Middleware using codec

> codec takes two functions `decoder: AOut => Either[E, AIn]` and `encoder: BIn => Either[E, BOut]`

Reviewer: ```suggestion
codec creates a middleware that transforms the input `Http` using two functions `decoder: AOut => Either[E, AIn]` and `encoder: BIn => Either[E, BOut]`
```

The below snippet takes two functions:
- decoder function to decode Request to String 
- encoder function to encode String to Response

> 

Reviewer: and will create a middleware that gives out an `Http[R,E,Request,Response]` from `Http[R,E,String,String]`

```scala
val middleware: Middleware[Any, Nothing, String, String, Request, Response] = Middleware.codec[Request,String](r => Right(r.method.toString()), s => Right(Response.text(s)))
```

> ### Middleware from an HttpApp

Reviewer: ```suggestion
### Middleware from an `Http` application
```

- Using `fromHttp`, it creates a middleware with output `Http` as specified `http`

```scala
val app: Http[Any, Nothing, Any, String] = Http.succeed("Hello World!")
val middleware: Middleware[Any, Nothing, Nothing, Any, Request, Response] = Middleware.fromHttp(app)
```

## Composition of middlewares

Middlewares can be composed using several special operators:

### Using `++`

`++` is an alias for `combine`. It combines that operates on the same input and output types into one.

```scala
val middleware: Middleware[Console with Clock, IOException, Request, Response, Request, Response] = Middleware.debug ++ Middleware.addHeader("X-Environment", "Dev")
```

### Using `<>`

> `<>` is an alias for `orElse`. While using `<>`, if the first middleware fails, the second middleware will be evaluated, ignoring the result from the first.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
`<>` is an alias for `orElse`. While using `<>`, if the output `Http` of the first middleware fails, the second middleware will be evaluated, ignoring the result from the first.
```

# Middleware

Middlewares are transformations that one can apply on any [`Http`](https://dream11.github.io/zio-http/docs/v1.x/dsl/http) to produce a new one. 
They can modify requests and responses and also transform them into more concrete domain entities.

> Middleware is simply a function that takes one `Http` as a parameter and returns another `Http`, ie, `f(Http) => Http` elaborated below in terms of type parameters "In" and "Out"

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
Middleware is simply a function that takes one `Http` as a parameter and returns another `Http`, i.e  `Http => Http` elaborated below in terms of type parameters "In" and "Out"
```

sidebar_position: "8"
---
# Middleware
Before introducing middleware, let us understand why they are needed.

## Need for middlewares and handling "aspects"

The definition of an "Aspect" in the programming world provided by Wikipedia
```
An aspect of a program is a feature linked to many other parts of the program, but which is not related to the program's primary function. 
An aspect crosscuts the program's core concerns, therefore violating its separation of concerns that tries to encapsulate unrelated functions.

> ```

Reviewer 2: avoid horizontal scroll

* `A` is the type of the function argument
* `B` type of the result when function succeeds 

Middleware is simply a function that takes one Http as a parameter and returns another Http,

`Http => Http`

So, a middleware represents transformation f1 => f2
 
They can modify requests and responses and also transform them into more concrete domain entities.
```scala
type Middleware[R, E, AIn, BIn, AOut, BOut] = Http[R, E, AIn, BIn] => Http[R, E, AOut, BOut]
```
* `AIn` and `BIn` are type params of the input `Http`
* `AOut` and `BOut` are type params of the output `Http`

#### A simple middleware example
Let us consider a simple example using out-of-the-box middleware called ```runAfter``` and ```addHeader```
We will write a middleware which will attach a custom header to the response. 

Start with imports
```scala
import zhttp.http._
import zhttp.service.Server
import zio.console.{putStrLn}
import zio.{App, ExitCode, URIO}
```
We create a middleware that appends additional header to the response indicating whether it is a Dev/Prod/Staging environment.
```scala
lazy val patchEnv = Middleware.addHeader("X-Environment", "Dev")
```
A test HttpApp with attached middleware
```scala

> val testApp = Http.collect[Request] {

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
val app = Http.collect[Request] {
```

>   case Method.GET -> !! / "endpoint1" => Response.text(s"Endpoint 1")

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
  case Method.GET -> !! /  name => Response.text(s"Hello $name")
```

}
val testAppWithMiddleware = testApp @@ patchEnv
```
Start the server 
```scala
override def run(args: List[String]): URIO[zio.ZEnv, ExitCode] =
  Server.start(8090, testAppWithMiddleware).exitCode
```
Fire a curl request and we see an additional header added to the response indicating the "Dev" environment
```
curl -i http://localhost:8090/endpoint1

HTTP/1.1 200 OK
content-type: text/plain
X-Environment: Dev
content-length: 10
Endpoint 1
```
## Create Middleware

Refer to [Middleware.scala](https://github.com/dream11/zio-http/blob/main/zio-http/src/main/scala/zhttp/http/Middleware.scala) for various ways of creating a middleware using functions like 
* identity
* succeed
* fail
* collect and collectZIO
* codec

> * fromHttp

Reviewer 2: One line explanation on when to use which constructor

---
# Middleware

> ## What is a "Middleware" and why they are needed

Reviewer 3: - [x] Just run the doc thru grammarly once

> ## What is a "Middleware" and why they are needed

Reviewer 3: Questions should end with a `?`

Before introducing middleware, let us understand why they are needed.

Consider the following example where we have two endpoints within HttpApp

> * GET user by id and
> * GET multiple users paginated

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
* GET a single user by id
* GET all users
```

```scala
  private val app = Http.collectZIO[Request] {
    case Method.GET -> !! / "users" / id =>
      // core business logic  
      dbService.lookupUsersById(id).map(Response.json(_.json))
    case Method.GET -> !! / "users"    =>
      // core business logic  
      dbService.paginatedUsers(pageNum).map(Response.json(_.json))
  }
```
#### The polluted code violates the principle of "Separation of concerns"

As our application grows, we want to code the following aspects like
* Basic Auth
* Request logging
* Response logging
* Timeout and retry

> For both our example endpoints, our core business logic gets buried under boilerplate like this

Reviewer 3: Great example. Can also talk about the concerns of writing unit tests for the core business logic.

```scala
            (for {
                // validate user
                _    <- MyAuthService.doAuth(request)
                // log request
                _    <- logRequest(request)
                // core business logic
                user <- dbService.lookupUsersById(id).map(Response.json(_.json))
                resp <- Response.json(user.toJson)
                // log response
                _    <- logResponse(resp)                
            } yield resp)
                    .timeout(2.seconds)
                    .retryN(5)
```
Imagine repeating this for all our end points!!!

So there are two problems with this approach

> * We are dangerously coupling our business logic with a lower level concern (like applying timeouts)

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
* We are dangerously coupling our business logic with cross cutting concerns (like applying timeouts)
```

* Also, we will have to do it for every single route in the system. For 100 routes we will need to repeat 100 timeouts!!!

> This can lead to a lot of boilerplate clogging our neatly written endpoints affecting readability, thereby leading to maintenance costs.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
This can lead to a lot of boilerplate clogging our neatly written endpoints affecting readability, thereby leading to increased maintenance costs.
```

There is a paradigm in the programming world called [aspect-oriented programming](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Aspect-oriented_programming) that aims for modular handling of these common concerns in an application. 

Some examples of common "aspects" required throughout the application
- logging,
- timeouts (preventing long-running code)
- retries (or handling flakiness for example while accessing third party APIs)
- authenticating a user before using the REST resource (basic, or custom ones like OAuth / single sign-on, etc).

This is where middleware comes to the rescue. 
Using middlewares we can compose out-of-the-box middlewares (or our custom middlewares) to address the above-mentioned concerns using ++ and @@ operators as shown below.

#### Cleaned up code using middleware to address cross-cutting concerns like auth, request/response logging, etc.
```scala
// compose basic auth, request/response logging, timeouts middlewares
val composedMiddlewares = Middleware.basicAuth("user","pw") ++ 
        Middleware.debug ++ 

>         Middleware.timeout(5 seconds) 

Reviewer 3: can describe what are we doing here. And how each piece relates to the work we were doing before.

private val app = Http.collectZIO[Request] {
  case Method.GET -> !! / "users" / id =>
    // core business logic  
    dbService.lookupUsersById(id).map(Response.json(_.json))
  case Method.GET -> !! / "users"    =>
    // core business logic  
    dbService.paginatedUsers(pageNum).map(Response.json(_.json))
} @@ composedMiddlewares // attach composedMiddlewares to the app using @@
```
Observe how we gained following benefits by using middlewares
* **Readability**: de-cluttering business logic.
* **Modularity**: we can manage aspects independently without making changes in 100 places. For example, 

>   * replacing the logging mechanism from logback to log4j2 will require a change in one place, the logging middleware).

Reviewer 3: Good point. Can talk about the Log4J usecase before when it was all boilerplaty.

  * replacing the authentication mechanism from OAuth to single sign-on will require changing the auth middleware
* **Testability**: we can test our aspects independently.

## Middleware in zio-http

A middleware helps in addressing common crosscutting concerns without duplicating boilerplate code.

#### Revisiting HTTP 
[`Http`](https://dream11.github.io/zio-http/docs/v1.x/dsl/http) is the most fundamental type for modelling Http applications

```Http[-R, +E, -A, +B]``` is equivalent to ```(A) => ZIO[R, Option[E], B]``` where

* `R` type of Environment 
* `E` type of the Error when the function fails with Some[E]

> * `A` is the type of the function parameter
> * `B` type of the result when function succeeds 

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
* `A` is the type of input given to the Http
* `B` type of the output produced by the Http
```

> Middleware is simply a function that takes one Http as a parameter and returns another Http,

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
Middleware is simply a function that takes one Http as a parameter and returns a new Http with some enhanced capabilities.
```

```Http => Http```

> So, a middleware represents function transformation f1 => f2

Reviewer 3: This is great, I think we should also showcase that you can call a middleware like this — 

```scala
mid(http)
```
Which emphasises on the fact that it's really a function :)

Then later slowly incorporate the `@@` syntax.

```scala
type Middleware[R, E, AIn, BIn, AOut, BOut] = Http[R, E, AIn, BIn] => Http[R, E, AOut, BOut]
```
* `AIn` and `BIn` are type params of the input `Http`

> * `AOut` and `BOut` are type params of the output `Http`

Reviewer 3: This is important, I think we should explain why do we have these type params. For eg: We can write middlewares that can modify an Http app such that it accepts a completely different input. 

For eg: 

```scala
val authApp: Http[Any, Nothing, AuthorizedRequest, Response] = ???
val app: Http[Any, HttpError, Request, Response] = authApp @@ authorize 
```

And explain a little bit on how powerful this API is. You can write codecs using middlewares etc.

This can also be seen as 
```

> AIn => ZIO[R, Option[E], BIn]  ---transformed by middleware--->  AOut => ZIO[R, Option[E], BOut]

Reviewer 3: This is a bit too much. Can avoid.

```
**HttpApp** is a specialized Http with `Request` and `Response` as input and output
```scala
type HttpApp[-R,+E] = Http[R, E, Request, Response]
```
So, in ```HttpApp``` context we can represent modified Request/Response pair
```
ReqIn => ZIO[R, Option[E], RespIn]  ---transformed by middleware--->  ReqOut => ZIO[R, Option[E], RespOut]
```
where ```ReqIn, ReqOut``` = ```Request``` and ```RespIn, RespOut``` = ```Response```

In ```HttpApp``` context, a middleware can modify requests and responses and also transform them into more concrete domain entities.

#### Attaching middleware to Http
`@@` operator is used to attach a middleware to an Http. Example below shows a middleware attached to an HttpApp
```scala
val app = Http.collect[Request] {
  case Method.GET -> !! / name => Response.text(s"Hello $name")
}
val appWithMiddleware = app @@ Middleware.debug
```

> Logically the code above translates to `debugFunction(app)`

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
Logically the code above translates to `Middleware.debug(app)`
```
